# Melanoma Detection Assignment

To build a CNN based model which can accurately detect melanoma. Melanoma is a type of cancer that can be deadly if not detected early. It accounts for 75% of skin cancer deaths. A solution that can evaluate images and alert dermatologists about the presence of melanoma has the potential to reduce a lot of manual effort needed in diagnosis.

# Datasets
The dataset consists of 2357 images of malignant and benign oncological diseases, which were formed from the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC). All images were sorted according to the classification taken with ISIC, and all subsets were divided into the same number of images.

To overcome the issue of class imbalance, used a python package Augmentor (https://augmentor.readthedocs.io/en/master/) to add more samples across all classes so that none of the classes have very few samples.

# CNN Architecture Design
To classify skin cancer using skin lesions images. To achieve higher accuracy and results on the classification task, I have built custom CNN model.

- Rescalling Layer - To rescale an input in the [0, 255] range to be in the [0, 1] range.
- Convolutional Layer - Convolutional layers apply a convolution operation to the input, passing the result to the next layer. A convolution converts all the pixels in its receptive field into a single value. For example, if you would apply a convolution to an image, you will be decreasing the image size as well as bringing all the information in the field together into a single pixel.
- Pooling Layer - Pooling layers are used to reduce the dimensions of the feature maps. Thus, it reduces the number of parameters to learn and the amount of computation performed in the network. The pooling layer summarises the features present in a region of the feature map generated by a convolution layer.
- Dropout Layer - The Dropout layer randomly sets input units to 0 with a frequency of rate at each step during training time, which helps prevent overfitting.
- Flatten Layer - Flattening is converting the data into a 1-dimensional array for inputting it to the next layer. We flatten the output of the convolutional layers to create a single long feature vector. And it is connected to the final classification model, which is called a fully-connected layer.
- Dense Layer - The dense layer is a neural network layer that is connected deeply, which means each neuron in the dense layer receives input from all neurons of its previous layer.
- Activation Function(ReLU) - The rectified linear activation function or ReLU for short is a piecewise linear function that will output the input directly if it is positive, otherwise, it will output zero.The rectified linear activation function overcomes the vanishing gradient problem, allowing models to learn faster and perform better.
- Activation Function(Softmax) - The softmax function is used as the activation function in the output layer of neural network models that predict a multinomial probability distribution. The main advantage of using Softmax is the output probabilities range. The range will 0 to 1, and the sum of all the probabilities will be equal to one.


# Table of Contents

* [General Info](*general-info)
* [Technologies Used](*technologies-used)
* [Conclusions](*conclusions)
* [Acknowledgements](*acknowledgements)

In the skin biopsy, the dermatologist takes some part of the skin lesion and examines it under the microscope. The current process takes almost a week or more, starting from getting a dermatologist appointment to getting a biopsy report. The aims to shorten the current gap to just a couple of days by providing the predictive model. The approach uses Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to classify nine types of skin cancer from outlier lesions images. This reduction of a gap has the opportunity to impact millions of people positively.

### Which class has the least number of samples?
Which classes dominate the data in terms of the proportionate number of samples? Handling class imbalances: Rectify class imbalances present in the training dataset with Augmentor library. Model Building & training on the rectified class imbalance data : Create a CNN model, which can accurately detect 9 classes present in the dataset. While building the model, rescale images to normalize pixel values between (0,1). Choose an appropriate optimiser and loss function for model training Train the model for ~50 epochs Write your findings after the model fit, see if the issues are resolved or not?
# Technologies Used

- Python
- Tensorflow - keras
- Matplotlib
- Augmentor

# Conclusions

As per the final model (model3), Training accuracy and validation accuracy is increased.
Model overfitting issue is solved.
Class rebalance helps in augmentation and achieving the best Training and validation accuracy.

# Acknowledgements
Upgrad Tutorials


<!-- Optional -->
<!-- ## License -->
<!-- This project is open source and available under the [... License](). -->

<!-- You don't have to include all sections - just the one's relevant to your project -->
